All, right. So, um, okay, So I'm going to go through this compiler design notes And figure out what I want to talk about. Okay, Um, so first is the traditional pipeline. Um, so you have the front end, Which does lexical analysis, parsing And name, resolution And type. Checking isn't something that I'm going to leave out. That's more of a semantic thing, and you do it while you're compiling. Um, and so you get this abstract syntax tree, and then you process the abstract syntax tree into an intermediate representation. And this is where the F expressions Are important because you have to actually keep around the abstract syntax tree as you evaluate it and process it into the intermediate representation. Because the way the macros work is that most of your Uh input is actually, Um, Uh, the the syntax trees. And so it only gets incrementally converted to The actual intermediate representation. Once you know that it's an applicative operator instead of a Um, Well, whatever they call it operative or whatever that, um, a macro, essentially, And so, So the middle, and I'm going to be basing it on partial evaluation and in particular. I found this paper on like hybrid tracing, and like, these papers evaluated what is the best way to do jit optimization and partial evaluation and stuff like that, And they came up with this hybrid architecture. And so that's the architecture that I want is some kind of hybrid jet partial evaluation sort of thing. Um, And, Uh, yeah. So, Um, and, and so the actual intermediate representation I F. I also want to incorporate this optimal evaluation stuff. Um, and so that involves it's essentially a, uh, sort of, memoization thing. Um, and so basically there's different ways to label expressions And some of the ways to label expressions. Um, They just like hash it, and the optimal evaluation is like a slightly, uh, different way of labeling expressions that doesn't Completely hash equal objects to equal hashes. Instead, it sort of keeps track of where things originated in the source code, and then it guarantes that things that originated from the same place in the source code will always be evaluated as a group or family. Um, and so that can be combined with hashing or memorization or hash consing or whatever it's called, Uh. And I, and so the question is how to do that? Um, I mean, it seems like you bought both sort of the, you know, tracking the values and making sure you aren't duplicating values. And then you also want tracking the values again on the value level to make sure if they're actually the same values that you don't store them multiple times. And so that's So that will be another tricky part of the evaluation engine. Um, so I'm thinking that the whole middle end will essentially be an evaluation engine that will handle this macro evaluation, and it will handle the partial evaluation and handle the jit and that sort of thing and what it will essentially produce is some kind of control flow graph, And this will be like, uh, basic control flow graph that, you know, corresponds pretty directly to assembly code, and that sort of thing, Um, not necessarily like Ll VM code, but Um, some sort of, you know, Decent imperative programming Language that it's really, you know, easy to see how it Maps to assembly. And Oh, another complicating factor is that I actually want to allow inline assembly from the start, and so that has to be embedded in the middle end is like it has to allow, uh, just embedding assembly operations and random places. And so, I should say, these are actually assembly. I'm going to wrap each, Uh, assembly instruction as an intrinsic, And so you're. It's actually going to pass around these intrinsics when it's dealing with the assembly, And so, but the intrinsics are going to map one to one to the assembly. Essentially, if you take what an assembly instruction does in terms of modifying registers and stuff, and you write that as a pure function, then that's going to be what the intrinsic is. Um, And so That is going to be a key part of how I Implement primitive operations is. I'm going to have primitive operations Depend on these intrinsics, and then the intrinsics are going to lower directly to assembly instructions, And then that gets into code generation is. It's going to lower these intrinsics directly to assembly instructions. Um, and so I'm not sure how, uh, slick. I can get The process, But ideally I want to have, like nothing, but functions and Jumps and intrinsic assembly instructions in the middle and after it's done with all this partial evaluation stuff so that it really is completely efficient. Machine code. When, uh, the code generation gets to dealing with it. Um, And so, yeah, the backhand, the code generation. Um, that's that's going to be your standard pipeline of, like, register, allocation, And scheduling and instruction, sequencing, and Selection, And things like that because you can do some selection in like the middle end and the front end. But like the fine grain stuff, like whether you pass a register or pass a, you know, intermediate value, or whatever that sort of stuff, I think, is you want in the code generation. Um, And so, Yeah, Um. And so then. I was also thinking about writing a custom Linker, Um, and that's basically because I don't like the way object files are linked, Uh. In the current systems, it seems like it's very slow and inefficient, and it just doesn't map well with how modern compilers generate code on sort of a function level or lower levels than that. And so I was thinking that what I could do was probably right, just like something that takes the output of compiling the control flow graph, and like directly produces and executable. Um, and if I manage the memory myself, and if I, you know, use the techniques for writing Fast linkers, which there's several blog posts about, like, how they made fast linkers. Then, I will get A fast Linker, and I'll because, like most, of what he was complaining about in those posts, was that he had to deal with these Legacy objects formats, and there was a lot of complexity, and it essentially just wasn't suited to what he wanted to do, and so that's why I want to custom Linker, Um, and that will integrate with the Incremental compilation system. And so, yeah, And so, I, I should mention that the whole compiler architecture, I want to make it. Follow this custom incremental build system. I've written, And this is, um, a complicated incremental build system, and I have another design document about it. So, yeah, Um. 

Okay, um, now let's go over this again and into more detail. Um, So, yeah, Okay, so the stages of compilation, Um. So, the life cycle analysis I was sort of thinking, like, I didn't want to write a lexical analyzer? There's a lot of stuff called scannerless parsing, And that's pretty good. Um, and then I was thinking. Also, I could use a large language model to sort of standardize the input into a specific lexical form, and so that could be essentially my initial lecture. Um, and so, Um, that's, you know, that doesn't actually solve the problem of tokenizing the input, but when you have the input and it's been parsed into discrete tokens by the language model. Then, you essentially have done a kind of lexical analysis on it. Um, And so that's very interesting. I would say is thinking about that, But I'm not too worried about the lecture. I would say whatever works works, you know, if I have to write a recursive descent parser and all that, then I'll do it. Um, And then moving on to parsing itself. I read a bunch of papers about different kinds of parsers, And there's some interesting stuff about yearly parsers and sort of parsers that can parse arbitrary BNF grammars. And Another thing that was clear was that you have to come up with an efficient way of storing the parse tree because And, you know just a pars Forest? For example, it's still apparently is too large to process, and so essentially all like General language parsers, Um, that can parse these Ambiguous BNF grammars. They have to disambiguate on the fly, because otherwise you get an exponential number Of parses, and it just doesn't work. And so that's Yeah, so, and that's something that I think doesn't come up a lot. When people talk about parsing is just the fact that there is, like, you know, an order and cubed. Um, and that's because even with, you know, fancy pars Forest, Uh, storing, you still have this exponential blow up that ends up turning into a cubic blow up with the pars Force, but still is pretty large. And so Just this ambiguating on the fly is much better. Um, and so if I do write a custom parser, I'll need to figure out how to, but hooks in that, Um, Okay, uh, yeah. Next is semantic analysis. Um, I guess, so that's kind of. I mean, it's bound up with the Um With the F expressions and the macro system because you can't actually resolve names until you have the macro that evaluates them in the context of that name, And so a lot of name resolution ends up being like delayed, sort of after the parsing after the generation of the intermediate representation. And it's more during this partial evaluation or optimization phase. Um, And so, Yeah, Um, Let's see, yeah. And so, uh, de Sugaring, for example, Um, that is implemented as an evaluation. You essentially say that this syntactic sugar is a macro, and this is how it's implemented as like this function, and what that macro does is essentially walks over the abstract syntax tree and runs the core language primitives directly. Um, and so you have to be a little careful that you don't get infinite Loops of syntax to find in terms of other pieces of syntax and those in turn designed in terms of the original syntax, But essentially, you have that the core language is just functions and assembly, and then everything else on top is syntactic sugar, And so that's very similar to Haskells, core language, and how it works with just. I'll essentially Lambda functions, And I was thinking, though, that lambdas were too simple. Um, they don't have essentially the bandwidth to represent very complicated expressions. So I was coming up with this more complicated logic based core language that was Based on Essentially directly based on linear logic, and so you take all of these connectives and expressions in linear logic. And you look at the proofs for those different, Uh, connectives, and those are the constructs Of the core language. So, like, you have a construct for implication, and then the way you in linear logic, you end up with You end a left rule and a right rule. Um, And the left rule introduces it on the left, and the right rule introduces on the right, and you look at the core language, then, and you have. Similarly, you have a left rule that introduces a, Uh, function as Actually that the left rule is the application, and so you have essentially the function and the argument as the two components of the left rule and simply on the right that introduces the actual function, and that Essentially defines it. As you know, an expression with an open value, Um, and so that kind of core language seemed like a very interesting thing, and the only issue is that it's a little more complex than the Lambda calculus, which only has one Constructor, And so I was trying to deal with all the different constructs, And it just got a little tedious to write all the code for it, Uh. But essentially it works. And because it's linear logic, it has a much closer correspondence to the structures I need for Optimal evaluation. And so, Essentially, Uh, I can use this core language. And because duplication and contraction, and so on, are explicitly marked in the linear logic rules. That saves me a fair amount of effort when I'm looking in. The analysis passes for optimal evaluation to figure out where I need to Decide whether things are equivalent or not, Um, essentially, like a lot of the rules, like the function, rule, and so on. They can't introduce a duplication, and so I don't need to analyze them for optimal evaluation to figure out which expressions are equivalent. Um, Okay, um, And so, yeah, uh, then the optimization passes. I haven't looked at too hard. The basic question is, how do I Implement all these optimization passes in this core language in a way that's very efficient because I want essentially most of these optimizations to be automatically done every, I mean. And if you have to like, run over a linear pass every time you want to like, remove dead coat or something, then you Are losing performance. What you want to do is keep track sort of a reference counted thing and say, oh, this piece of code is no longer connected to the rest of the graph. Therefore, it's dead code, and I can immediately delete it. Um, and so there's a lot of questions about how to design the intermediate representation to support that. And I kind of got bogged down in listing all of the different Optimization passes that you could do for intermediate representations, Uh, but I do think that just doing, you know, selecting a decent number is a good idea, and then some optimization passes. They can actually, Um, be implemented in like multiple levels of complexity. Like, for example, dead code, you could do it at a syntactic level and say, oh, this is not referenced, and then you can also do it at a semantic level, and you can say that This piece of code is Always going to evaluate to this answer. And so, then, in this condition, then that means that this will always be true. And so, therefore, this portion of the code is dead code, and so the semantic analysis is a lot more complicated, Um, but essentially interacts with this partial evaluation sort of thing. Where, when you're generating the control flow graph, you can actually say this part of the code is dead. This part of the code is not Um, and so you know. So there's sort of these two levels where, on the one hand, you're doing a syntactic analysis, which just ensures that the intermediate representation is always storing somewhat efficiently the code. And then there's this semantic level where you want to make it very efficient to analyze the code with these more heavyweight passes. Uh, that do partial evaluation, and so forth. And I think the core language with the sequent calculus and so forth Should be Better for that. But I don't really know. Um, I mean, you don't know until you try it. And I asked some pretty experienced people on how they designed their intermediate representations, and they basically said they just threw things in until it supported what they need. There isn't really A distinct way of Designing intermediate representations that, uh, you other than sort of. What do I need requirements? And then, like, you know, making it satisfy those requirements? Um, Yeah, uh. And so, then code generation like, I mean, I, I would say that this control flow graph with assembly intrinsics is Pretty much the ideal format for code generation? Um, I, I think, llvm, actually. They essentially have gotten to the point where they're adding new intrinsics for every new assembly instruction they encounter, And they didn't start that way, and they started with all these weird instructions that were supposed to be cross-platform. And at this point that's essentially bit biting them in the back, and they've made a poor choice. Um, And so the the thing about the assembly intrinsics is that it makes the code architecture dependent, Um, and so in particular, when you're trying to decide All, like, what is the implementation of addition or whatever you actually do have to look at the different assembly instructions available and select them? Um, And so that's sort of an issue. Is that A lot of them? A lot of these independent representations. They simply don't have the capability to represent these very obscure assembly instructions, and so that's why you have the assembly pipeline that it starts from the beginning, allowing assembly instructions Um, and then on the back end in the code generation. It means you have to support generating all those assembly instructions, which does add a little bit of tedious work of like, you know. For example, for Intel And x86, there's this xcd library And That sorry, xed And, um, So this Library, It's sort of it's. It's becoming a partial standard. Is that, you know, generating x86 code is hard, and this, you know, lets you do it with, like this? C API that accepts pretty much all the instructions that Intel supports, And so it turns out even that isn't complete. You have to support like custom hexadecimal codes, Uh, but that's kind of at the point where It's easier to Sort of treat that as a special case than to you. Just use xcd for the Most of the stuff. Um, yeah, and then linking, so there's also like there's a few modes where you want to run. Um, so one is this producing a direct executable, and then also you want this sort of just in time compilation where you have a managed program execution that, you know, sort of monitors execution on the Fly, and it optimizes code and re-optimizes it. And so, like, in Haskell, for example, you have this ghci interactive, Um, sort of thing, and so I, I think that is definitely an important mode to support, as well as the ahead of time compilation. But the interactive sort of mode, I think, is also important, and those are the two main modes. I would say I'm not sure there are any other decent modes that need to be done. 

Okay, um, so talking about parallelism? Well, yeah, Um, so we need to Sort of support multi-threaded compilation. And you know, because we have this incremental computation model That has like This, you know, complex Runtime system that's schedules things and makes them you know, run, and parallel and balance his thread workloads and all that we want. As fine-grained compilation units as possible, Because then We will save the most work possible when we rerun it. Um, and so, Um, So I should say that the incremental compilation model I have is a forward model. So, essentially, you run things, and you record their dependencies. And then, when you're running again, you just check whether it matches the dependencies, and if so, you reuse it. And if not, then you run it again. Um, and so that's on not what Russ does where they use a query system. Um, this really is a forward model where it's like every run is running. Like, you know, Basically, it from, you know, in the same order that you'd expect it to. You don't have to, like, adjust the components to follow a predefined structure. You can just sort of write the code how you'd expect to write it and then you annotate it with where it reads things and writes things, and then the incremental compilation system uses those traces to figure out whether to rerun things. Um, And so There is an issue of data storage, though because you have to figure out what format to store the results of all these little pieces in in a way that doesn't use up too much storage space and then allows manipulating them efficiently. And so that's like a hard part. And so, like, you know you, you essentially have to have a smart data structure That Doesn't Duplicate any information. But then also like allows incremental modifications and that sort of like, you know, doesn't lose any data when you modify it. And You know, so it's kind of like an immutable or a persistent data structure. And so, Um, You know. And then, on the other hand, you might find out that, you know, some intermediate results are, like, Uh, in very large, but then they're very seldom, you know, the same. And so, you might want to say, oh, well, we just store this in memory. And we don't even Persist it. We just write it out, Um, to memory, and then read it in memory and generate it every time because it's cheap to generate, Um, Let's see. Oh yeah, and then there's save points. Um, I don't know anything about safe points. Really think they're important to jit compilation though, so I should figure out how to deal with them. I looked at them and I was like, well, isn't that just, but between every insembly instruction And I was thinking, like, maybe you could use traps and like, you know, have some kind of stack Trace reconstruction thing, and that is how it makes a safe point, and so then, everything is a safe point, but I have to figure out if that will actually work, or if it's too complicated. 

Um, Okay, yeah, um, so I won't talk too much About the Syntax. I don't really know the syntax. I don't really care. I mean, like I said, it's just like you throw our language model at it, and then you get a syntax. Um, Yeah, um. 

Oh so, yeah, so type checking. I should elaborate more on this. You do it during the partial analysis. You treat essentially types as assertions, and then you essentially have the partial evaluation prove as a sort of formal verification sort of thing that that assertion cannot be triggered, and therefore the program is valid, and that is where you turn types into assertions. Um, And so you don't have any inference you don't have. Um, sort of, you know? What is the type of this expression types are purely annotations in the program that are checked but not inferred? And so, you know, essentially you're when you're inferring the control flow graph. You're also using that control flow graph to prove assertions about the program. And that's where you check the types. 

Okay, um, and then scoping. It's a bit weird because in my programming language, Um, you have the macro stuff so you can't even resolve names to begin with. And then you have Dynamic scoping, which means that you can override names within functions, Uh, from parent functions that call them. And so The only place lexical scoping. Actually, it takes place is, when you're sort of binding names, you use the lexical scope to help resolve, which names, Uh, shadow each other versus bind to each other, So that's, um, yeah, that's certainly of an area That will need some work, Uh, but it's essentially part of the evaluation engine. It's not really a part of the front end or the back end, Um. 

Oh yeah, and I was going to say so for the back end. The instruction, selection, and lowering and register allocation and stuff like that. There's this Unison paper, then that's where I want to base most of the structure. The back end on Um, and so, you know, there's even like a project. The C plus implementation and I should go through that and sort of take notes and figure out what to do, Uh, but he did say it wasn't really production quality code. It didn't get merged into lvm. It's, you know, worth looking at, but it's not, you know, optimized for either, you know, readability, or for efficiency? 

Oh, and then there's profile guided optimization, so that's sort of. If you have a static binary uh, and you aren't running in this interactive mode. Then you figure out you know how to record all these statistics, and then you save the profile. And then you run it again with the profile or compile it again. I mean, And then you get, you know, a faster program. And so the question is like, what kinds of counters do you use and like Java hot spot uses all sorts of different kinds of counters. And you know, it's sort of okay. So, if you can't have too much data, Uh, and you just have to figure out what's relevant, though, and like what you can get away with and then Also sort of Making sure that the data collection is not too expensive and doesn't actually, Uh, slow down the program, And so in particular, it's very important that Turning off profile guided optimization does not change the behavior of the program, And so figuring out how to like essentially save the profiling instructions until the last possible moment you really want to compile them out in, like the back end or simpler. It's very close to it, where it will have the least affect removing those instructions. 

And so actually. One way to think about, um, They are execution engine Is the That you can say that you have just in time optimization, and you have this optimizing compiler, And then this, uh, static compilation is you build the same thing, except that it just doesn't have the on stack replacement sort of things. And then all of the Um Behavior is hard-coded. Um, But essentially, you still have an execution engine. I mean, in practice with, like these macros and stuff, you actually sometimes have to compile Entire language at runtime and include the compiler as a library, And so that um Means That essentially you have a jit regardless. You just don't have like certain jit functionality. Maybe you have only the simplest, like, you know, basic compiler, and you don't have the other tiers that, like, optimize? 

Okay, yeah, um. And so, then the memory management Is also this very complicated formal verification thing. You essentially look at the last place that the memory is used, Except that that's impossible to compute. So, instead, you compute that the first place where the memory is definitely not used, and then you free it. Um, And so That requires this very detailed analysis of the control float graph. But in practice, It is possible to compute this. It's just that you, I mean, you have to deal with some ion-computable things where you have a very complicated control flow graph and you can't necessarily, you know, model the program as a finite state machine or something simple like that, and you need to, you know, handle the stack, and you need to handle turn completeness that all those complicated things. But in practice, people seem to be able to do formal verification of these properties Fairly easily, and this property is actually just a reachability property, and so it's one of the simplest, undecidable properties to check. Um, it's still requires, though, that you need this Loop that is capable of deciding undecidable properties. And so that means you know sort of researching all the formal verification literature And figuring out how they design things. And you know how they build their control flow glass so that you can, you know, Um, handle these loops and so forth and efficiently compute these properties? 

And so, in my notes, these are called Destructors Or finalizers. I'm not sure. Um, so, yeah, as far as threading primitives. Like, I mean, it essential level assembly, a single threaded. So, really, all we're doing is having Concurrency is a library, so you essentially like all these synchronization Primitives and so forth. You have the assembly instructions they translate to, and you just include those as a library. 

Um, so then we also need a flags Library. And like, you know, basically, a persvasive way to pass around compiler Flags and control its Behavior. Um, we need incremental testing so we can figure out the outputs of the compiler and debug it properly. We need diagnostic messages. Um, we need unit and regression testing. Uh, version control, Um, and then I still have to figure out what language is best for implementing the compiler. 

Oh, and then I, I really should have a debugger for the language. Um, I mean, in a profiler, Um, and visualization tools, Um, You know, a lot of languages get away without a decent debugger or anything like that, but You know I want the the full stack, and so that's important. Oh, and then there's compiler warnings and error messages And just generating output to the user, Uh, and command line flags and stuff like that. Um, and then timing and profiling of the compiler. Um, And then You know, let's see, real world testing, Um. 

And then also fuzz testing in particular and stress testing and boundary testing. And then You know, I don't know. I mean, it's on GitHub, so There's not really a lot of, you know, complexity there with regards to interacting with community and stuff, Um? 

Yeah! And so, then, like, there's formalizing the language and like documenting it properly, Um, and then proving that the compiler is correct, Which might have to wait until the compiler can actually handle proving things. Um, Let's see, oh, there's alias analysis. And just all these General static analyzes, Um. 

Oh, and then there's figuring out how to handle build time options and pragmas or source level tributes And then optimization levels, Uh, and figuring out what instruction sets to support and fine-tuning the optimizations, Um, and then handling cross compilation. You have, like the Host and Target. And That's apparently all you need. Like, GCC has this third triple thing, Um, but you don't really need it. It's just because it doesn't support compiling all the back ends at once, and so it In practice. You only need like the host and the Target. And then, If you're, I mean, if you want backhands or to compile out, then you're essentially making a strip down compiler. And that's like a completely separate set of options, Um. 

Yeah, no, I should mention that the static verification, the formal analysis, uh, it also chokes a lot of other properties. Besides type annotations, like it should do balance checking. It should do buffer overflows and memory safety Control flow Integrity, Uh, that sort of stuff. 